---
Pr-id: MoneyLab
P-id: INC Reader
A-id: 10
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: unique no.
Article-title: title of the article
Article-status: accepted
Author: name(s) of author(s)
Author-email:   corresponding address
Author-bio:  about the author
Abstract:   short description of the article (100 words)
Keywords:   50 keywords for search and indexing
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# The new video geography

# An introduction to *Geoblocking and Global Video Culture*

**Ramon Lobato**

This book is about the cultural geography of video streaming. It is
about platforms – YouTube, iPlayer, DailyMotion, Netflix, Periscope,
Youku – and how they manage their international audiences and shape them
into markets. It is about governments, state institutions and
public-service broadcasters, and the technologies they use to regulate
video flows across national borders. It is about users and audiences,
and how they negotiate diverse forms of access and restriction. Above
all, it is about cultural circulation – how different kinds of content
reach dispersed audiences through authorized and unauthorized channels.

As an entry point into these wider issues, contributors to this book
focus on a specific technology of access control: geoblocking.
Geoblocking, a spatially-aware filtering technology that uses IP address
detection to determine a user’s location, has become a key mechanism for
managing international video streaming traffic and maintaining
separation of national media markets. The process is simple: when you
visit a website, your IP address (e.g. 198.8.80.200) is run through a
database to identify your ISP and geographic location, which is then
matched against a blacklist or whitelist to establish access rights. If
you are in an approved location, access is granted and the video
automatically plays. Those outside the authorized zone will likely see a
familiar error message – something like ‘this video is not available in
your region’ – or perhaps an endlessly buffering screen.

Most major video platforms use geoblocking to filter international
audiences. Geoblocking allows these platforms to customise their
offerings according to territory, language, and advertising markets, and
provides an automated mechanism to enforce territorial licensing
arrangements with rights-holders. In this sense it is a form of access
control enacted at the level of content and platform regulation, rather
than network infrastructure.[^01LobatoIntroduction_1] But geoblocking has more subtle effects
as well. Like search localisation and algorithmic recommendation,
geoblocking is a ‘soft’ form of cultural regulation. Its widespread
adoption is changing the nature of the open internet by locating users
within national cyberspaces and customising content based on certain
ideas about territorial markets.

*Geoblocking and Global Video Culture* takes these issues as the basis
for a critical and eclectic discussion of the internet’s changing
cultural geography. Many contributors to this book are screen scholars,
interested in the politics of media globalisation and how this
translates into the digital environment. Other contributors approach the
topic through legal analysis, cultural history, and spatial theory.
Together, these essays offer a series of distinctive stories about a
fast-changing and complex issue. Mixing macro-level insights with
bottom-up accounts of everyday user experience, and moving from Europe
to South America to the Asia-Pacific, the various essays in this book
provide provocative arguments about the cultural implications of the new
video geography.

A major theme of the book is circumvention. As with many digital rights
management technologies, geoblocking systems can be easily tricked. In
recent years the appearance of user-friendly circumvention tools –
including VPNs (virtual private networks), DNS (domain name system)
proxies, web proxies, and location-masking browser extensions – has
unleashed a wave of unauthorised cross-border media activity, allowing
audiences to easily access streaming, news and sports services from
other countries. As we shall soon see, these and other tools are used by
a wide cross-section of users, and for remarkably different purposes. In
exploring these various forms of blockage and circumvention, and the
connections between them, our aim is to tell a different kind of story
about internet blocking beyond the ‘digital divide’ paradigm.

Geoblocking circumvention is closely linked to other issues including
internet governance, censorship, and cultural policy, because the same
privacy tools that can be used to hack into iPlayer or Netflix are in
other contexts used to get around state internet censorship. As
researchers at Harvard University’s Berkman Center for internet and
Society have documented, global circumvention – encompassing the use of
commercial VPNs, activist-designed tools, simple web proxies and
HTTP/SOCKS proxies – is an activity that involves tens of millions of
internet users worldwide.[^01LobatoIntroduction_2] In Turkey, Iran, China and other nations
where popular video and social networking platforms are regularly
blocked by the state, circumvention is a mainstream practice.

One of our aims in *Geoblocking and Global Video Culture* is to explore
linkages between these various blocking and circumvention practices –
site-blocking, geoblocking, and the tactics people use to get around
them. To this end, we have organized the book into two sections. The
first section, ‘Perspectives on Geoblocking’, probes the historical,
legal and cultural dimensions of geo-location and region control in
media industries. These essays investigate a diverse array of platforms
– from live-streaming apps and illegal streaming websites to the game
consoles of the 1980s – and provide theoretical tools to understand the
evolution of regional lock-out technologies in particular media sectors.
The second section, ‘Circumvention Case Studies’, looks at these issues
from the ground up, by analysing how users negotiate geoblocking and
internet filtering controls in different countries. Here, our seven
contributors – experts on informal media circulation that we have
collaborated with over the course of a year-long research project – have
written vivid first-hand accounts of ground-level circumvention
practices in nine countries: China, Australia, Turkey, Sweden, Malaysia,
Brazil, Iran, Cuba and the United States. Each of these countries has a
different story to tell when it comes to geoblocking, and together these
accounts provide a fascinating snapshot of global circumvention practice
(broadly defined).

To provide a taste of what is to come, I will now introduce three
cross-cutting issues that connect the various essays in this book.
First, I discuss the experience of blockage as a foundational logic of
the internet; second, the history of circumvention technologies and
practices; and third, the relationship between political censorship and
pleasurable consumption, as seen through the lens of geoblocking.

## Blockage and flow

One of our starting points when developing the idea for this book was
the uncontroversial observation that, for many internet users, the
experience of online video is characterised by blockage rather than
flow. Governments (and ISPs) block internet sites for reasons related to
public policy and political expediency. Media companies use
geo-filtering to screen out undesirable audiences. Poor infrastructure
and choked servers lead to delays, dropouts and buffering. The end
result of these back-end blockages, from the perspective of the
end-user, is that digital video culture becomes a set of unevenly
distributed experiences with a peculiar geography of availability and
unavailability. As Ira Wagman and Peter Urquhart observe, ‘the fact
remains that *where* you access the internet says a lot about *what
kind* of internet you experience’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_3]

This is the messy reality of today’s digital video ecology. Rather than
free flow and instant access, the actually-existing experience from the
user’s perspective typically involves a series of partially-available
platforms that shift and change according to one’s location – a lumpy
landscape of formal and informal services that sometimes work and
sometimes do not, depending on where you are located. Consider the
following examples:

-   YouTube is available in 70 different country-specific versions,
    including dedicated platforms for small countries such as Latvia
    and Yemen. But it is blocked in China, Iran, Pakistan and Syria,
    among other countries, and is intermittently unavailable in
    Thailand, Turkey, Bangladesh and Morocco.

-   YouTube also has significantly restricted content in Germany because
    of a long-running copyright dispute with music collecting societies.

-   Netflix is available in approximately 80 territories but geoblocked
    in the rest of the world, including China, Japan, Central and
    Eastern Europe, and all of Africa.

-   Major streaming sites including BBC iPlayer and Hulu are available
    only in their country of origin (the United Kingdom and United
    States, respectively) and are geoblocked everywhere else.

-   The catalogues of ‘global’ services such as Google Play, Amazon and
    iTunes vary widely between countries in terms of the content they
    offer and how much they charge for it, with 40%-50% price
    differentials between countries being a common occurrence.

-   Wealthy countries have abundant local catch-up TV while poorer
    countries have little or none, and rely on piracy as a
    post-broadcast circulatory system.

As this list suggests, video services are fast and free in some
countries but are unavailable or prohibitively expensive in others.
These examples underscore the enduring importance of geography to
digital video culture, reminding us that where we live – or at least
where websites think we live – makes a big difference to how we
experience the digital.

Jack Goldsmith and Tim Wu argue that internet history since the late
1990s can be described as a process of ‘becoming bordered’. ‘The
result,’ they write, ‘is an internet that differs among nations and
regions that are increasingly separated by walls of bandwidth, language,
and filters’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_4] The end result is the fragmentation of the internet
into a series of localised experiences and filtered environments. We are
not just talking here about the infrastructural geography of networks,
according to which some countries and demographics are blessed with
cheap and fast connectivity while others live with dial-up, mobile-only,
or no access at all. Instead, we are referring to an overlapping
political-economic geography of content and service availability, shaped
by market forces, licensing arrangements and state control, and which is
premised on the availability of geo-location databases, geo-caching
services (offered by content delivery networks such as Akamai), and
location-aware credit card processing.

Geolocation technology dates back to the end of the 1990s when the first
tech companies specialising in location detection, such as Infosplit,
began to appear. Up to this point, most websites had only one interface
for all global users. The more sophisticated corporate sites would
customise their offerings based on user-entered information (*Please
select your country/region*). But with the rise of geolocation databases
and third-party location-detection services, it became practical to
automate this process. Now location could be determined by IP address,
with pages detecting your location then loading language- and
territory-specific content to suit. The accuracy of these IP geolocation
systems was sometimes questionable, as many readers will no doubt
remember, and the present system still involves a messy patchwork of
different databases that do not always play well together. But over time
the kinks have been gradually ironed out to a point where IP geolocation
works as intended most of the time.

To the delight of digital advertising companies, content could now be
customised to local markets. Websites could now imagine, understand and
process their customers in geographic market segments, down to their
postcodes (Hulu, for example, boasts it ‘can target \[ads\] by Nielsen
DMA, State or zip code’[^01LobatoIntroduction_5]). For internet idealists with their dreams
of global connectivity and universal access, this resurgence of physical
geography has been problematic. One widely discussed consequence is that
there is now no such thing as a universal internet – understood as a
stable set of globally available cultural materials – because
customisation means that content and experience change according to
location.

This brings us to television, and to its ongoing metamorphosis into an
online medium. As television becomes a streaming service, delivered over
the internet rather than through the airwaves, it becomes location-aware
(and location-blind) in new ways. IP geolocation now serves a primary
role in determining what content is available where, reconfiguring the
spatial ‘footprints’ and access-control functions familiar to us from
the broadcast model (TV as a local/national medium transmitted over the
airwaves) and through direct-broadcast satellite transmission (TV as a
set of internationally available but locally decoded channels).[^01LobatoIntroduction_6] In
other words, geoblocking becomes a kind of de facto global cultural
policy, shaping the communication environment by making available
certain kinds of materials, while restricting others.

One implication of this new TV landscape is that internet theory and
broadcast history are brought closer together. Approaching the internet
as a localised and unevenly available set of cultural experiences – as
opposed to a global, universal superhighway – reminds us that the
internet, like television, is always locally configured as well as
globally networked. This diversity of institutional forms is noted by
global television scholars, who emphasise that TV production cultures,
advertising systems, and regulatory frameworks still vary significantly
between countries*.* As Graeme Turner and Jinna Tay write in *Television
Studies after TV*, ‘Notwithstanding the internationalization of the
media industries, these days the answer to the question “What is
television?” very much depends on where you are’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_7] Turner and Tay
didn’t have geoblocking in mind when they wrote that sentence, but they
may as well have. Geoblocking reminds us that geography matters a great
deal to television, and never moreso than in the internet age.

## Control and circumvention

A second cross-cutting theme in our book is circumvention – the tactics,
tools and workarounds that people use to access blocked video sites. As
our contributors elegantly describe, the geography of blockage and flow
is provisional rather than absolute because internet users have many
ways to work around geographic restrictions. Indeed, IP address
geoblocking is particularly easy to circumvent through basic software
tools – including VPNs, DNS proxies, web proxies, and TOR – which can
unlock geo-restricted content by rerouting data through an offshore IP
address, making it appear as though the user is located in another
country. In recent years a growing ecology of circumvention tools has
emerged, including free ad-supported services (Hotspot Shield, Hola,
Addtele), subscription VPNs (Private internet Access, HotSpotNordVPN,
TigerVPN), and DNS proxies designed explicitly for unlocking offshore
content (Unblock-US, Getflix).

![](media/image1.png){width="2.075411198600175in"
height="4.864583333333333in"}

Figure 1: A VPN server selection menu

![](media/image2.png){width="6.260416666666667in"
height="3.2291666666666665in"}

Figure 2: VPN marketing highlights unblocking functions

Circumvention is a complex topic, because most technologies used for
geoblocking circumvention were not designed for this purpose and have
other, licit functions. For example, VPNs are a popular security tool
with privacy-conscious internet users who want extra protection when
using public wifi networks. Others use VPNs for business-related
networking or to dial into remote servers when working from home. There
is nothing questionable about these activities, which are increasingly
part of mainstream computer use. Indeed, many consumer groups advocate
VPN adoption as a protection measure against hacking and identity theft.
But VPNs are confounding objects for internet governance because they
erode the link between IP address, location and identity. Allowing users
to ‘tunnel’ outside national borders, they offer an ideal workaround for
geoblocking, filtering and site-blocking, while presenting complex
challenges for governments and media corporations.

Our point here is that there are different kinds of circumvention and
proxying practices, associated with different kinds of internet use, and
enabled by different kinds of software tools – and none of these things
can be conflated in a straightforward manner. As Roberts, Zuckerman and
Palfrey write, circumvention needs to be understood as ‘a large topic
that reaches deeply into a number of other large topics, including
filtering, privacy, surveillance, and content neutrality’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_8] While the
focus of this book is on geoblocking circumvention, many contributors in
Section Two of the book also look at site-blocking circumvention,
anonymization, and the links between these practices.

In China, Iran and Turkey, for example, circumvention tools are used
widely because they open up access to YouTube, Twitter, and other
blocked sites. Some of this activity is politically inflected but a lot
of it is simply about social networking. In Australia, Sweden, and
Brazil, in contrast, circumvention is more about access to first-release
movies and TV, and to the expanded streaming catalogues available in the
major markets. Some countries, such as Malaysia, display a mix of these
two tendencies. In all cases, circumvention interfaces with
anonymization and privacy, but not always in predictable ways.

Thinking about circumvention from this perspective makes visible an
array of everyday location-masking practices, from prosaic acts of
access (Chinese teenagers using proxies to log into Facebook and
YouTube, German tourists streaming Euro league matches) through to more
overtly political resistances (as when Turkish activists share proxy
settings in defiance of government internet censorship). So there is a
nexus here between corporate media policies, censorship and
circumvention, which are all linked through the use of informal software
hacks. As our contributors show, this nexus is a rich site for
theorising. In the small-scale tactics of internet circumvention we see
larger stories unfolding about cultural regulation, networked activism,
and cyber-identity.

There are also interesting possibilities here for media historiography,
and for understanding the social shaping of network technologies. Each
piece of circumvention software has its own fascinating and largely
untold history: the VPN, for example, has been around for decades and
was used primarily as a business networking tool until the early 2000s
when it morphed into a personal computing product. Since then hundreds
of small VPN companies have appeared and disappeared (by our count,
there are at least 140 currently operating). In addition to these
international VPNs, there are also “local” VPNs running in some
countries, notably Iran, which have Persian-language interfaces and
local payment systems. There is much scepticism as to the bona fides of
these companies, which are seen to be government-linked, but people use
them anyway because they are functional and cheap. In this unusual
state-supervised circumvention practice we see a strange mix of
sanctioned and unauthorised, formal and informal, all blurring together.

Some popular VPNs, such as the British service Hide My Ass, have become
major commercial enterprises. Founded in 2005 by a sixteen year old
high-school student from Norfolk, Jack Cator, Hide My Ass has built
itself into a mainstream privacy brand. Between its current VPN offering
and its older web proxy service – which was tailor-made for kids to get
around social media blocks on school computers – Hide My Ass claims to
have had more than two million customers over the years, with 200,000
paying subscribers currently on the books, and almost 100 staff based in
London, Kiev and Belgrade. This growth has paid off handsomely for
Cator, who in 2015 cashed in and sold his business to the antivirus
company AVG for £40 million.[^01LobatoIntroduction_9]

Browser plug-ins such as Unotelly and Hola Unblocker are another popular
circumvention option. These proxy services are even easier to use than
VPNs: just select a country or platform in the browser menu bar, and
your IP address will be changed accordingly. Unlike VPNs, these are free
services that do not require signup or subscription. But there is
sometimes a hidden cost: the possibility for your IP address to be
hijacked, as Hola users recently discovered when their bandwidth was
loaned out to a third-party company for a botnet attack.[^01LobatoIntroduction_10]
Experiences such as this are common when it comes to free or
ad-supported circumvention tools, especially apps, browsers extensions
and web proxies with questionable business models that aren’t
immediately apparent to the end user. The number of free tools is always
on the rise but the landscape is cluttered with commercial options of
varying legitimacy and security, and the risk of virus and malware
infection is ever-present.

Alongside these commercial products, there are other kinds of
circumvention tools designed explicitly to get around government
censorship. The peer-to-peer proxy service Lantern, for example,
provides a popular way to evade national internet filtering. Lantern
works by linking together users in filtered countries with a trusted
international network of volunteers who share access to their IP
addresses. A mix of start-up, NGO and private company, Lantern is
ostensibly non-profit but somewhat opaque in its ambitions. It has been
funded by the US State Department, reflecting the wider interest in
circumvention technologies as tools of foreign policy.

As these examples suggest, internet circumvention is a space that brings
together a strange mix of actors: activists, governments, entrepreneurs,
criminals, geeks, pirates, school kids, and millions of ordinary people
who wish to be conceal their identity or location temporarily. The
chapters in this book trace out some of these unlikely connections in
rich detail.

## Censorship and consumption

A third theme in this book is the relationship between market and state
– or more specifically, the relationship between commercial technologies
of access control and government site-blocking, surveillance and
censorship. As we have seen already, from the user’s perspective these
two realities are closely intertwined: the geography of digital markets
is overlaid with a political geography of unavailability. While
technologically distinct, these two control systems need to be
considered in tandem if we are to understand their cultural
ramifications.

Geoblocking and government site-blocking occupy different ideological
terrain. Geoblocking is typically discussed as an issue of access to
markets and services. The paradigm here is consumer rights, rather than
communication or citizenship. Key voices in the debate include early
adopters, TV buffs and groups like the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
all strident critics of geoblocking. In contrast, discussion of
site-blocking tends to occur within a paradigm of internet freedom, and
is typically linked to a discourse of free speech, political liberalism,
communication rights and cyber-liberties.

Internet freedom is based on the idea that digital communication is
inherently liberating and access control is inherently suspect. It tends
to see the world through an ontology of free and unfree countries. A
shortcoming of the internet freedom literature is that it has little to
say about the everyday politics of pleasure and consumption. This realm,
so familiar to media and culture critics, has been absent from the
debate about internet filtering and censorship, which takes as its
prototypical text not the quotidian experience of checking Facebook or
watching a movie but the exceptional experience of political agitation,
activism and resistance. Our book tries very deliberately to work across
this gulf, foregrounding traces of the political in the everyday and
vice versa. As the following chapters demonstrate, there is no clear
distinction between pleasure and politics in internet use.

Does a Chinese VPN user need to be accessing an anti-government news
site for their activities to be considered ‘political’? If they are just
accessing Facebook to catch up with friends, does that matter?
Conversely, what larger political issues surround the seemingly
innocuous acts of everyday consumption enabled by entertainment-related
circumvention in the ostensibly ‘free’ West? What temporary political
affiliations and alliances may be produced in the consumer VPN scene?
These are some of the questions that arise when we think about
consumption and censorship together.

Rather than distinguishing between free and unfree societies, we take as
our departure point the understanding that internet access and cultural
consumption in all nations are shaped by overlapping forms of power,
including both state and market power. We keep an open mind to some of
the larger ethical questions lurking behind the internet freedom
debates, such as whether access in its own right is always unequivocally
a good thing, and whether states have the right to regulate their
national internet space.

We also pay attention to how ideas of internet censorship and
consumption are articulated, valued and debated according to cultural
context. As contributors to this book show, the problem of geoblocking
plays out quite differently in different countries. With the possible
exception of the United States – which, as Evan Elkins shows, is
shielded from the drama of geo-restriction due to its massive media
complex – each country has its own set of policies and priorities around
the geoblocking issue. In Australia and Canada, for example, a consumer
rights discourse prevails, in which the main issue is the timely and
affordable provision of digital content. The debate here is framed
around windowing and discrepant pricing policies, leading to delays and
price hikes for ‘peripheral’ English-language markets. This is what Tama
Leaver calls ‘the tyranny of digital distance’, or the lag between first
release in the center and availability at the edges.[^01LobatoIntroduction_11]

In Europe, the politics of geoblocking are quite different. With its
dense patchwork of languages, borders and diasporas, Europe has long
been a hotbed of unauthorised cross-border media consumption: people
watch satellite TV signals meant for other nations, buy
multiply-subtitled DVDs, and make shopping trips to neighbouring
countries where prices are cheaper. This is an enduring feature of
European consumption, one that has diminished little with the
establishment of a single currency. While much policy attention is now
directed at the creation of an EU Digital Single market – in which all
28 EU member countries would share common pricing and availability for
digital goods – intra-European variances in price and availability
naturally persist.

Within the European integration project, geoblocking is starting to be
seen by as an anti-competitive – indeed, anti-European – technological
restriction on free trade. Andrus Ansip, the former Estonian prime
minister and current European Commission vice-president, has been
leading the charge. Since 2014, “tackling geoblocking” has been an
official policy priority of the European Commission. Its Digital Single
Market policy reads like a *Lifehacker* post: “Geo-blocking leaves many
Europeans unable to use the online services available in other EU
countries, or redirects them to a local store with different prices…
Such discrimination cannot exist in a single market.”[^01LobatoIntroduction_12] Here we see
the “merely cultural” issue of geoblocking framed quite seriously as a
threat to continental capitalism and its cherished values of free trade,
consumer rights, and smart regulation.

The politics of blockage and flow are different again in China, where a
fast-growing domestic media sector – including a massive digital media
production ecology – is overlaid with a carefully managed state system
of site blocks, filtering and slow-downs, designed to temper demand for
offshore services (especially Facebook and Google) and direct this
inward to the local, regulated alternatives. For China the geoblocking
issue is not so much the unavailability of content; when it comes to
Chinese-language media and services, everything you would need is now
inside the Great Firewall. Instead, it is about how and why certain user
groups feel the need to climb this wall. As Jinying Li’s chapter in this
book evocatively describes, ‘wall crossing’ desire is widespread but
unevenly distributed among the middle classes, and linked in complex
ways to internal governance.

All this represents a new challenge for digital media theory, because it
requires us to rethink some of the paradigms of control and censorship
that we have inherited from earlier periods. Geoblocking, broadly
defined, is a problem for many internet users in many countries, but to
different extents, and for different reasons. It affects rich and poor
alike, but can be circumvented easily for those with money or know-how.
It interacts in complex ways with other kinds of internet phenomena,
such as peer-to-peer piracy.

For example, we can see that the geoblocking issue has relatively little
in common with the paradigm of the ‘digital divide’ that shaped
discussion of the first decades of global internet use. Initially
organised around a binary of use and non-use, with use concentrated in
the developed world and non-use in the peripheries – and later
developing into a more complex theory about the mutually reinforcing
dynamics of class, infrastructure, education and state investment – the
spatial imaginary of the digital divide has limited relevance to the
problem of geoblocking. Nor is geoblocking a simplistic story of
internet freedom versus internet censorship, that Western liberal vision
of a free West against a censorious Rest. The new video geography does
not cleanly follow any of these imaginaries.

As the case studies in the second section of this book show, the rise of
circumvention practices around the world may instead be linked instead
to the emergence of a transnational class who are using circumvention
software for a mix of reasons – not just for “resistance”, nor
exclusively for consumption. This requires a variegated model of both
access and politics. As Sean Cubitt argues, the question of access in
internet culture needs to be understood through multiple registers
simultaneously:

> The network society affords various kinds of access: to the rich
> consumer, video-on-demand (VOD), and to the genuinely wealthy
> subscription or sale models which avoid the dull necessity of paying
> attention to ads. For the Chinese masses, the protection of the Golden
> Shield; for the wealthy, Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) which
> fasttrack past the firewall like express check-in at the airport. For
> the ordinary punter, a data feed from Bloomberg; for the wealthy
> subscriber, real-time data on every stock for sale on every
> market.[^01LobatoIntroduction_13]

It may be that VPNs, proxies, and other geo-evasion technologies provide
a set of popular technical competencies that are, taken together, laying
the foundations for a global geo-circumvention system. This system
connects politics with pleasure; connects censorship with consumption;
embraces cutting-edge technologies while drawing on longer prehistories
of cross-border arbitrage; and brings activists, file-sharers, hackers
and mainstream users into unlikely and uncomfortable contact with each
other. The politics of circumvention are anything but straightforward,
as our authors illustrate. But in their complexity they provide the
coordinates for a different map of cultural power, and a new way to
think about the geopolitics of internet control.

## References

Christophers, Brett. *Envisioning Media Power: On Capital and
Geographies of Television* Lanham: Lexington Books, 2009.

Cubitt, Sean. ‘Telecommunication Networks: Economy, Ecology, Rule’,
*Theory, Culture and Society* 31 (2014): 185-199.

Deibert, Ronald et al (eds). *Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power,
Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.

Deibert, Ronald et al. (eds). *Access Contested: Security, Identity, and
Resistance in Asian Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA; MIT Press, 2012.

Deibert, Ronald et al. (eds). *Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of
Global Internet Filtering*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.

European Commission, ‘Better Online Access to Digital Services’, n.d.,
http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/digital-single-market/access/index\_en.htm.

Goldsmith, Jack and Tim Wu. *Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a
Borderless World*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

Kompare, Derek. ‘Adverstreaming: Hulu Plus’, *Flow*, 24 Feb 2014,
<http://flowtv.org/2014/02/adverstreaming-hulu-plus/>

Leaver, Tama. ‘Watching “Battlestar Galactica” in Australia and the
Tyranny of Digital Distance’, *Media International Australia* 126
(2008): 145-154.

O’Regan, Tom. ‘From Piracy to Sovereignty: International VCR Trends’,
*Continuum: The Australian Journal of Media & Culture* 4.2 (1991):
112-135.

Parks, Lisa and Nicole Starosielski. *Signal Traffic: Critical Studies
of Media Infrastructures*, University of Illinois Press, 2015.

Paul, Ian. ‘Ultra-popular Hola VPN Extension Sold Your Bandwidth for use
in a Botnet Attack’, *PC World*, 29 May 2015,
http://www.pcworld.com/article/2928340/ultra-popular-hola-vpn-extension-sold-your-bandwidth-for-use-in-a-botnet-attack.html.

Roberts, Hal et al. *2010 Circumvention Tool Usage Report*, Cambridge,
MA: Berkman Center for Internet and Society, 2010

Roberts, Hal, Ethan Zuckerman, and John Palfrey, *2007 Circumvention
Landscape Report: Methods, Uses, and Tools,* Cambridge, MA: The Berkman
Center for Internet and Society, Harvard University, 2007.

Shadbolt, Peter. ‘How Misbehaving at School Made One Man a Millionaire’,
*BBC News*, 18 May 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/business-32702501.

Turner, Graeme and Jinna Tay. *Television Studies after TV:
Understanding Television in the Post-Broadcast Era*, London: Routledge,
2009.

Wagman, Ira and Peter Urquhart. ‘“This content is not available in your
region”: Geoblocking culture in Canada’, in Darren Wershle, Rosemary
Coombe and Martin Zeilinger (eds) *Dynamic Fair Dealing: Creating
Canadian Culture Online*, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2014,
pp. 124-132.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_1]: In this sense our approach can be distinguished from studies of
    the material infrastructure of the internet. For example, see: Lisa
    Parks and Nicole Starosielski, *Signal Traffic: Critical Studies of
    Media Infrastructures*, University of Illinois Press, 2015.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_2]: Berkman Center researchers have produced a series of pioneering
    studies of internet filtering, censorship and circumvention. See:
    Ronald Deibert et al. (eds), *Access Denied: The Practice and Policy
    of Global Internet Filtering*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008; Hal
    Roberts et al, *2010 Circumvention Tool Usage Report*, Cambridge,
    MA: Berkman Center for Internet and Society, 2010; Deibert et al
    (eds), *Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in
    Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010; Deibert et al. (eds),
    *Access Contested: Security, Identity, and Resistance in Asian
    Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA; MIT Press, 2012.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_3]: Ira Wagman and Peter Urquhart, ‘“This content is not available in
    your region”: Geoblocking culture in Canada’, in Darren Wershle,
    Rosemary Coombe and Martin Zeilinger (eds), *Dynamic Fair Dealing:
    Creating Canadian Culture Online*, Toronto: University of Toronto
    Press, 2014, pp. 126.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_4]: Jack Goldsmith and Tim Wu, *Who Controls the Internet? Illusions
    of a Borderless World*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006, p.
    viii.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_5]: Derek Kompare, ‘Adverstreaming: Hulu Plus’, *Flow*, 24 Feb 2014,
    <http://flowtv.org/2014/02/adverstreaming-hulu-plus/>

[^01LobatoIntroduction_6]: These issues have been explored through key works in video
    geography, to which we are indebted. See: Tom O’Regan, ‘From Piracy
    to Sovereignty: International VCR Trends’, *Continuum: The
    Australian Journal of Media & Culture* 4.2 (1991): 112-135; Brett
    Christophers, *Envisioning Media Power: On Capital and Geographies
    of Television* Lanham: Lexington Books, 2009.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_7]: Graeme Turner and Jinna Tay, *Television Studies after TV:
    Understanding Television in the Post-Broadcast Era*, London:
    Routledge, 2009, p.8.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_8]: Hal Roberts, Ethan Zuckerman, and John Palfrey, *2007
    Circumvention Landscape Report: Methods, Uses, and Tools,*
    Cambridge, MA: The Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard
    University, 2007, p. 9.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_9]: Peter Shadbolt, ‘How Misbehaving at School Made One Man a
    Millionaire’, *BBC News*, 18 May 2015,
    http://www.bbc.com/news/business-32702501.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_10]: Ian Paul, ‘Ultra-popular Hola VPN Extension Sold Your Bandwidth
    for use in a Botnet Attack’, *PC World*, 29 May 2015,
    http://www.pcworld.com/article/2928340/ultra-popular-hola-vpn-extension-sold-your-bandwidth-for-use-in-a-botnet-attack.html.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_11]: Tama Leaver, ‘Watching “Battlestar Galactica” in Australia and
    the Tyranny of Digital Distance’, *Media International Australia*
    126 (2008), pp. 145-154.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_12]: European Commission, ‘Better Online Access to Digital Services’,
    http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/digital-single-market/access/index\_en.htm

[^01LobatoIntroduction_13]: Sean Cubitt, ‘Telecommunication Networks: Economy, Ecology,
    Rule’, *Theory, Culture and Society* 31 (2014), p. 191.
