


# The new video geography

# An introduction to *Geoblocking and Global Video Culture*

**Ramon Lobato**

This book is about the cultural geography of video streaming. It is
about platforms – YouTube, iPlayer, DailyMotion, Netflix, Periscope,
Youku – and how they manage their international audiences and shape them
into markets. It is about governments, state institutions and
public-service broadcasters, and the technologies they use to regulate
video flows across national borders. It is about users and audiences,
and how they negotiate diverse forms of access and restriction. Above
all, it is about cultural circulation – how different kinds of content
reach dispersed audiences through authorized and unauthorized channels.

As an entry point into these wider issues, contributors to this book
focus on a specific technology of access control: geoblocking.
Geoblocking, a spatially-aware filtering technology that uses IP address
detection to determine a user’s location, has become a key mechanism for
managing international video streaming traffic and maintaining
separation of national media markets. The process is simple: when you
visit a website, your IP address (e.g. 198.8.80.200) is run through a
database to identify your ISP and geographic location, which is then
matched against a blacklist or whitelist to establish access rights. If
you are in an approved location, access is granted and the video
automatically plays. Those outside the authorized zone will likely see a
familiar error message – something like ‘this video is not available in
your region’ – or perhaps an endlessly buffering screen.

Most major video platforms use geoblocking to filter international
audiences. Geoblocking allows these platforms to customise their
offerings according to territory, language, and advertising markets, and
provides an automated mechanism to enforce territorial licensing
arrangements with rights-holders. In this sense it is a form of access
control enacted at the level of content and platform regulation, rather
than network infrastructure.[^01LobatoIntroduction_1] But geoblocking has more subtle effects
as well. Like search localisation and algorithmic recommendation,
geoblocking is a ‘soft’ form of cultural regulation. Its widespread
adoption is changing the nature of the open internet by locating users
within national cyberspaces and customising content based on certain
ideas about territorial markets.

*Geoblocking and Global Video Culture* takes these issues as the basis
for a critical and eclectic discussion of the internet’s changing
cultural geography. Many contributors to this book are screen scholars,
interested in the politics of media globalisation and how this
translates into the digital environment. Other contributors approach the
topic through legal analysis, cultural history, and spatial theory.
Together, these essays offer a series of distinctive stories about a
fast-changing and complex issue. Mixing macro-level insights with
bottom-up accounts of everyday user experience, and moving from Europe
to South America to the Asia-Pacific, the various essays in this book
provide provocative arguments about the cultural implications of the new
video geography.

A major theme of the book is circumvention. As with many digital rights
management technologies, geoblocking systems can be easily tricked. In
recent years the appearance of user-friendly circumvention tools –
including VPNs (virtual private networks), DNS (domain name system)
proxies, web proxies, and location-masking browser extensions – has
unleashed a wave of unauthorised cross-border media activity, allowing
audiences to easily access streaming, news and sports services from
other countries. As we shall soon see, these and other tools are used by
a wide cross-section of users, and for remarkably different purposes. In
exploring these various forms of blockage and circumvention, and the
connections between them, our aim is to tell a different kind of story
about internet blocking beyond the ‘digital divide’ paradigm.

Geoblocking circumvention is closely linked to other issues including
internet governance, censorship, and cultural policy, because the same
privacy tools that can be used to hack into iPlayer or Netflix are in
other contexts used to get around state internet censorship. As
researchers at Harvard University’s Berkman Center for internet and
Society have documented, global circumvention – encompassing the use of
commercial VPNs, activist-designed tools, simple web proxies and
HTTP/SOCKS proxies – is an activity that involves tens of millions of
internet users worldwide.[^01LobatoIntroduction_2] In Turkey, Iran, China and other nations
where popular video and social networking platforms are regularly
blocked by the state, circumvention is a mainstream practice.

One of our aims in *Geoblocking and Global Video Culture* is to explore
linkages between these various blocking and circumvention practices –
site-blocking, geoblocking, and the tactics people use to get around
them. To this end, we have organized the book into two sections. The
first section, ‘Perspectives on Geoblocking’, probes the historical,
legal and cultural dimensions of geo-location and region control in
media industries. These essays investigate a diverse array of platforms
– from live-streaming apps and illegal streaming websites to the game
consoles of the 1980s – and provide theoretical tools to understand the
evolution of regional lock-out technologies in particular media sectors.
The second section, ‘Circumvention Case Studies’, looks at these issues
from the ground up, by analysing how users negotiate geoblocking and
internet filtering controls in different countries. Here, our seven
contributors – experts on informal media circulation that we have
collaborated with over the course of a year-long research project – have
written vivid first-hand accounts of ground-level circumvention
practices in nine countries: China, Australia, Turkey, Sweden, Malaysia,
Brazil, Iran, Cuba and the United States. Each of these countries has a
different story to tell when it comes to geoblocking, and together these
accounts provide a fascinating snapshot of global circumvention practice
(broadly defined).

To provide a taste of what is to come, I will now introduce three
cross-cutting issues that connect the various essays in this book.
First, I discuss the experience of blockage as a foundational logic of
the internet; second, the history of circumvention technologies and
practices; and third, the relationship between political censorship and
pleasurable consumption, as seen through the lens of geoblocking.

## Blockage and flow

One of our starting points when developing the idea for this book was
the uncontroversial observation that, for many internet users, the
experience of online video is characterised by blockage rather than
flow. Governments (and ISPs) block internet sites for reasons related to
public policy and political expediency. Media companies use
geo-filtering to screen out undesirable audiences. Poor infrastructure
and choked servers lead to delays, dropouts and buffering. The end
result of these back-end blockages, from the perspective of the
end-user, is that digital video culture becomes a set of unevenly
distributed experiences with a peculiar geography of availability and
unavailability. As Ira Wagman and Peter Urquhart observe, ‘the fact
remains that *where* you access the internet says a lot about *what
kind* of internet you experience’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_3]

This is the messy reality of today’s digital video ecology. Rather than
free flow and instant access, the actually-existing experience from the
user’s perspective typically involves a series of partially-available
platforms that shift and change according to one’s location – a lumpy
landscape of formal and informal services that sometimes work and
sometimes do not, depending on where you are located. Consider the
following examples:

-   YouTube is available in 70 different country-specific versions,
    including dedicated platforms for small countries such as Latvia
    and Yemen. But it is blocked in China, Iran, Pakistan and Syria,
    among other countries, and is intermittently unavailable in
    Thailand, Turkey, Bangladesh and Morocco.

-   YouTube also has significantly restricted content in Germany because
    of a long-running copyright dispute with music collecting societies.

-   Netflix is available in approximately 80 territories but geoblocked
    in the rest of the world, including China, Japan, Central and
    Eastern Europe, and all of Africa.

-   Major streaming sites including BBC iPlayer and Hulu are available
    only in their country of origin (the United Kingdom and United
    States, respectively) and are geoblocked everywhere else.

-   The catalogues of ‘global’ services such as Google Play, Amazon and
    iTunes vary widely between countries in terms of the content they
    offer and how much they charge for it, with 40%-50% price
    differentials between countries being a common occurrence.

-   Wealthy countries have abundant local catch-up TV while poorer
    countries have little or none, and rely on piracy as a
    post-broadcast circulatory system.

As this list suggests, video services are fast and free in some
countries but are unavailable or prohibitively expensive in others.
These examples underscore the enduring importance of geography to
digital video culture, reminding us that where we live – or at least
where websites think we live – makes a big difference to how we
experience the digital.

Jack Goldsmith and Tim Wu argue that internet history since the late
1990s can be described as a process of ‘becoming bordered’. ‘The
result,’ they write, ‘is an internet that differs among nations and
regions that are increasingly separated by walls of bandwidth, language,
and filters’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_4] The end result is the fragmentation of the internet
into a series of localised experiences and filtered environments. We are
not just talking here about the infrastructural geography of networks,
according to which some countries and demographics are blessed with
cheap and fast connectivity while others live with dial-up, mobile-only,
or no access at all. Instead, we are referring to an overlapping
political-economic geography of content and service availability, shaped
by market forces, licensing arrangements and state control, and which is
premised on the availability of geo-location databases, geo-caching
services (offered by content delivery networks such as Akamai), and
location-aware credit card processing.

Geolocation technology dates back to the end of the 1990s when the first
tech companies specialising in location detection, such as Infosplit,
began to appear. Up to this point, most websites had only one interface
for all global users. The more sophisticated corporate sites would
customise their offerings based on user-entered information (*Please
select your country/region*). But with the rise of geolocation databases
and third-party location-detection services, it became practical to
automate this process. Now location could be determined by IP address,
with pages detecting your location then loading language- and
territory-specific content to suit. The accuracy of these IP geolocation
systems was sometimes questionable, as many readers will no doubt
remember, and the present system still involves a messy patchwork of
different databases that do not always play well together. But over time
the kinks have been gradually ironed out to a point where IP geolocation
works as intended most of the time.

To the delight of digital advertising companies, content could now be
customised to local markets. Websites could now imagine, understand and
process their customers in geographic market segments, down to their
postcodes (Hulu, for example, boasts it ‘can target \[ads\] by Nielsen
DMA, State or zip code’[^01LobatoIntroduction_5]). For internet idealists with their dreams
of global connectivity and universal access, this resurgence of physical
geography has been problematic. One widely discussed consequence is that
there is now no such thing as a universal internet – understood as a
stable set of globally available cultural materials – because
customisation means that content and experience change according to
location.

This brings us to television, and to its ongoing metamorphosis into an
online medium. As television becomes a streaming service, delivered over
the internet rather than through the airwaves, it becomes location-aware
(and location-blind) in new ways. IP geolocation now serves a primary
role in determining what content is available where, reconfiguring the
spatial ‘footprints’ and access-control functions familiar to us from
the broadcast model (TV as a local/national medium transmitted over the
airwaves) and through direct-broadcast satellite transmission (TV as a
set of internationally available but locally decoded channels).[^01LobatoIntroduction_6] In
other words, geoblocking becomes a kind of de facto global cultural
policy, shaping the communication environment by making available
certain kinds of materials, while restricting others.

One implication of this new TV landscape is that internet theory and
broadcast history are brought closer together. Approaching the internet
as a localised and unevenly available set of cultural experiences – as
opposed to a global, universal superhighway – reminds us that the
internet, like television, is always locally configured as well as
globally networked. This diversity of institutional forms is noted by
global television scholars, who emphasise that TV production cultures,
advertising systems, and regulatory frameworks still vary significantly
between countries*.* As Graeme Turner and Jinna Tay write in *Television
Studies after TV*, ‘Notwithstanding the internationalization of the
media industries, these days the answer to the question “What is
television?” very much depends on where you are’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_7] Turner and Tay
didn’t have geoblocking in mind when they wrote that sentence, but they
may as well have. Geoblocking reminds us that geography matters a great
deal to television, and never moreso than in the internet age.

## Control and circumvention

A second cross-cutting theme in our book is circumvention – the tactics,
tools and workarounds that people use to access blocked video sites. As
our contributors elegantly describe, the geography of blockage and flow
is provisional rather than absolute because internet users have many
ways to work around geographic restrictions. Indeed, IP address
geoblocking is particularly easy to circumvent through basic software
tools – including VPNs, DNS proxies, web proxies, and TOR – which can
unlock geo-restricted content by rerouting data through an offshore IP
address, making it appear as though the user is located in another
country. In recent years a growing ecology of circumvention tools has
emerged, including free ad-supported services (Hotspot Shield, Hola,
Addtele), subscription VPNs (Private internet Access, HotSpotNordVPN,
TigerVPN), and DNS proxies designed explicitly for unlocking offshore
content (Unblock-US, Getflix).

![](media/image1.png){width="2.075411198600175in"
height="4.864583333333333in"}

Figure 1: A VPN server selection menu

![](media/image2.png){width="6.260416666666667in"
height="3.2291666666666665in"}

Figure 2: VPN marketing highlights unblocking functions

Circumvention is a complex topic, because most technologies used for
geoblocking circumvention were not designed for this purpose and have
other, licit functions. For example, VPNs are a popular security tool
with privacy-conscious internet users who want extra protection when
using public wifi networks. Others use VPNs for business-related
networking or to dial into remote servers when working from home. There
is nothing questionable about these activities, which are increasingly
part of mainstream computer use. Indeed, many consumer groups advocate
VPN adoption as a protection measure against hacking and identity theft.
But VPNs are confounding objects for internet governance because they
erode the link between IP address, location and identity. Allowing users
to ‘tunnel’ outside national borders, they offer an ideal workaround for
geoblocking, filtering and site-blocking, while presenting complex
challenges for governments and media corporations.

Our point here is that there are different kinds of circumvention and
proxying practices, associated with different kinds of internet use, and
enabled by different kinds of software tools – and none of these things
can be conflated in a straightforward manner. As Roberts, Zuckerman and
Palfrey write, circumvention needs to be understood as ‘a large topic
that reaches deeply into a number of other large topics, including
filtering, privacy, surveillance, and content neutrality’.[^01LobatoIntroduction_8] While the
focus of this book is on geoblocking circumvention, many contributors in
Section Two of the book also look at site-blocking circumvention,
anonymization, and the links between these practices.

In China, Iran and Turkey, for example, circumvention tools are used
widely because they open up access to YouTube, Twitter, and other
blocked sites. Some of this activity is politically inflected but a lot
of it is simply about social networking. In Australia, Sweden, and
Brazil, in contrast, circumvention is more about access to first-release
movies and TV, and to the expanded streaming catalogues available in the
major markets. Some countries, such as Malaysia, display a mix of these
two tendencies. In all cases, circumvention interfaces with
anonymization and privacy, but not always in predictable ways.

Thinking about circumvention from this perspective makes visible an
array of everyday location-masking practices, from prosaic acts of
access (Chinese teenagers using proxies to log into Facebook and
YouTube, German tourists streaming Euro league matches) through to more
overtly political resistances (as when Turkish activists share proxy
settings in defiance of government internet censorship). So there is a
nexus here between corporate media policies, censorship and
circumvention, which are all linked through the use of informal software
hacks. As our contributors show, this nexus is a rich site for
theorising. In the small-scale tactics of internet circumvention we see
larger stories unfolding about cultural regulation, networked activism,
and cyber-identity.

There are also interesting possibilities here for media historiography,
and for understanding the social shaping of network technologies. Each
piece of circumvention software has its own fascinating and largely
untold history: the VPN, for example, has been around for decades and
was used primarily as a business networking tool until the early 2000s
when it morphed into a personal computing product. Since then hundreds
of small VPN companies have appeared and disappeared (by our count,
there are at least 140 currently operating). In addition to these
international VPNs, there are also “local” VPNs running in some
countries, notably Iran, which have Persian-language interfaces and
local payment systems. There is much scepticism as to the bona fides of
these companies, which are seen to be government-linked, but people use
them anyway because they are functional and cheap. In this unusual
state-supervised circumvention practice we see a strange mix of
sanctioned and unauthorised, formal and informal, all blurring together.

Some popular VPNs, such as the British service Hide My Ass, have become
major commercial enterprises. Founded in 2005 by a sixteen year old
high-school student from Norfolk, Jack Cator, Hide My Ass has built
itself into a mainstream privacy brand. Between its current VPN offering
and its older web proxy service – which was tailor-made for kids to get
around social media blocks on school computers – Hide My Ass claims to
have had more than two million customers over the years, with 200,000
paying subscribers currently on the books, and almost 100 staff based in
London, Kiev and Belgrade. This growth has paid off handsomely for
Cator, who in 2015 cashed in and sold his business to the antivirus
company AVG for £40 million.[^01LobatoIntroduction_9]

Browser plug-ins such as Unotelly and Hola Unblocker are another popular
circumvention option. These proxy services are even easier to use than
VPNs: just select a country or platform in the browser menu bar, and
your IP address will be changed accordingly. Unlike VPNs, these are free
services that do not require signup or subscription. But there is
sometimes a hidden cost: the possibility for your IP address to be
hijacked, as Hola users recently discovered when their bandwidth was
loaned out to a third-party company for a botnet attack.[^01LobatoIntroduction_10]
Experiences such as this are common when it comes to free or
ad-supported circumvention tools, especially apps, browsers extensions
and web proxies with questionable business models that aren’t
immediately apparent to the end user. The number of free tools is always
on the rise but the landscape is cluttered with commercial options of
varying legitimacy and security, and the risk of virus and malware
infection is ever-present.

Alongside these commercial products, there are other kinds of
circumvention tools designed explicitly to get around government
censorship. The peer-to-peer proxy service Lantern, for example,
provides a popular way to evade national internet filtering. Lantern
works by linking together users in filtered countries with a trusted
international network of volunteers who share access to their IP
addresses. A mix of start-up, NGO and private company, Lantern is
ostensibly non-profit but somewhat opaque in its ambitions. It has been
funded by the US State Department, reflecting the wider interest in
circumvention technologies as tools of foreign policy.

As these examples suggest, internet circumvention is a space that brings
together a strange mix of actors: activists, governments, entrepreneurs,
criminals, geeks, pirates, school kids, and millions of ordinary people
who wish to be conceal their identity or location temporarily. The
chapters in this book trace out some of these unlikely connections in
rich detail.

## Censorship and consumption

A third theme in this book is the relationship between market and state
– or more specifically, the relationship between commercial technologies
of access control and government site-blocking, surveillance and
censorship. As we have seen already, from the user’s perspective these
two realities are closely intertwined: the geography of digital markets
is overlaid with a political geography of unavailability. While
technologically distinct, these two control systems need to be
considered in tandem if we are to understand their cultural
ramifications.

Geoblocking and government site-blocking occupy different ideological
terrain. Geoblocking is typically discussed as an issue of access to
markets and services. The paradigm here is consumer rights, rather than
communication or citizenship. Key voices in the debate include early
adopters, TV buffs and groups like the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
all strident critics of geoblocking. In contrast, discussion of
site-blocking tends to occur within a paradigm of internet freedom, and
is typically linked to a discourse of free speech, political liberalism,
communication rights and cyber-liberties.

Internet freedom is based on the idea that digital communication is
inherently liberating and access control is inherently suspect. It tends
to see the world through an ontology of free and unfree countries. A
shortcoming of the internet freedom literature is that it has little to
say about the everyday politics of pleasure and consumption. This realm,
so familiar to media and culture critics, has been absent from the
debate about internet filtering and censorship, which takes as its
prototypical text not the quotidian experience of checking Facebook or
watching a movie but the exceptional experience of political agitation,
activism and resistance. Our book tries very deliberately to work across
this gulf, foregrounding traces of the political in the everyday and
vice versa. As the following chapters demonstrate, there is no clear
distinction between pleasure and politics in internet use.

Does a Chinese VPN user need to be accessing an anti-government news
site for their activities to be considered ‘political’? If they are just
accessing Facebook to catch up with friends, does that matter?
Conversely, what larger political issues surround the seemingly
innocuous acts of everyday consumption enabled by entertainment-related
circumvention in the ostensibly ‘free’ West? What temporary political
affiliations and alliances may be produced in the consumer VPN scene?
These are some of the questions that arise when we think about
consumption and censorship together.

Rather than distinguishing between free and unfree societies, we take as
our departure point the understanding that internet access and cultural
consumption in all nations are shaped by overlapping forms of power,
including both state and market power. We keep an open mind to some of
the larger ethical questions lurking behind the internet freedom
debates, such as whether access in its own right is always unequivocally
a good thing, and whether states have the right to regulate their
national internet space.

We also pay attention to how ideas of internet censorship and
consumption are articulated, valued and debated according to cultural
context. As contributors to this book show, the problem of geoblocking
plays out quite differently in different countries. With the possible
exception of the United States – which, as Evan Elkins shows, is
shielded from the drama of geo-restriction due to its massive media
complex – each country has its own set of policies and priorities around
the geoblocking issue. In Australia and Canada, for example, a consumer
rights discourse prevails, in which the main issue is the timely and
affordable provision of digital content. The debate here is framed
around windowing and discrepant pricing policies, leading to delays and
price hikes for ‘peripheral’ English-language markets. This is what Tama
Leaver calls ‘the tyranny of digital distance’, or the lag between first
release in the center and availability at the edges.[^01LobatoIntroduction_11]

In Europe, the politics of geoblocking are quite different. With its
dense patchwork of languages, borders and diasporas, Europe has long
been a hotbed of unauthorised cross-border media consumption: people
watch satellite TV signals meant for other nations, buy
multiply-subtitled DVDs, and make shopping trips to neighbouring
countries where prices are cheaper. This is an enduring feature of
European consumption, one that has diminished little with the
establishment of a single currency. While much policy attention is now
directed at the creation of an EU Digital Single market – in which all
28 EU member countries would share common pricing and availability for
digital goods – intra-European variances in price and availability
naturally persist.

Within the European integration project, geoblocking is starting to be
seen by as an anti-competitive – indeed, anti-European – technological
restriction on free trade. Andrus Ansip, the former Estonian prime
minister and current European Commission vice-president, has been
leading the charge. Since 2014, “tackling geoblocking” has been an
official policy priority of the European Commission. Its Digital Single
Market policy reads like a *Lifehacker* post: “Geo-blocking leaves many
Europeans unable to use the online services available in other EU
countries, or redirects them to a local store with different prices…
Such discrimination cannot exist in a single market.”[^01LobatoIntroduction_12] Here we see
the “merely cultural” issue of geoblocking framed quite seriously as a
threat to continental capitalism and its cherished values of free trade,
consumer rights, and smart regulation.

The politics of blockage and flow are different again in China, where a
fast-growing domestic media sector – including a massive digital media
production ecology – is overlaid with a carefully managed state system
of site blocks, filtering and slow-downs, designed to temper demand for
offshore services (especially Facebook and Google) and direct this
inward to the local, regulated alternatives. For China the geoblocking
issue is not so much the unavailability of content; when it comes to
Chinese-language media and services, everything you would need is now
inside the Great Firewall. Instead, it is about how and why certain user
groups feel the need to climb this wall. As Jinying Li’s chapter in this
book evocatively describes, ‘wall crossing’ desire is widespread but
unevenly distributed among the middle classes, and linked in complex
ways to internal governance.

All this represents a new challenge for digital media theory, because it
requires us to rethink some of the paradigms of control and censorship
that we have inherited from earlier periods. Geoblocking, broadly
defined, is a problem for many internet users in many countries, but to
different extents, and for different reasons. It affects rich and poor
alike, but can be circumvented easily for those with money or know-how.
It interacts in complex ways with other kinds of internet phenomena,
such as peer-to-peer piracy.

For example, we can see that the geoblocking issue has relatively little
in common with the paradigm of the ‘digital divide’ that shaped
discussion of the first decades of global internet use. Initially
organised around a binary of use and non-use, with use concentrated in
the developed world and non-use in the peripheries – and later
developing into a more complex theory about the mutually reinforcing
dynamics of class, infrastructure, education and state investment – the
spatial imaginary of the digital divide has limited relevance to the
problem of geoblocking. Nor is geoblocking a simplistic story of
internet freedom versus internet censorship, that Western liberal vision
of a free West against a censorious Rest. The new video geography does
not cleanly follow any of these imaginaries.

As the case studies in the second section of this book show, the rise of
circumvention practices around the world may instead be linked instead
to the emergence of a transnational class who are using circumvention
software for a mix of reasons – not just for “resistance”, nor
exclusively for consumption. This requires a variegated model of both
access and politics. As Sean Cubitt argues, the question of access in
internet culture needs to be understood through multiple registers
simultaneously:

> The network society affords various kinds of access: to the rich
> consumer, video-on-demand (VOD), and to the genuinely wealthy
> subscription or sale models which avoid the dull necessity of paying
> attention to ads. For the Chinese masses, the protection of the Golden
> Shield; for the wealthy, Virtual Private Networks (VPNs) which
> fasttrack past the firewall like express check-in at the airport. For
> the ordinary punter, a data feed from Bloomberg; for the wealthy
> subscriber, real-time data on every stock for sale on every
> market.[^01LobatoIntroduction_13]

It may be that VPNs, proxies, and other geo-evasion technologies provide
a set of popular technical competencies that are, taken together, laying
the foundations for a global geo-circumvention system. This system
connects politics with pleasure; connects censorship with consumption;
embraces cutting-edge technologies while drawing on longer prehistories
of cross-border arbitrage; and brings activists, file-sharers, hackers
and mainstream users into unlikely and uncomfortable contact with each
other. The politics of circumvention are anything but straightforward,
as our authors illustrate. But in their complexity they provide the
coordinates for a different map of cultural power, and a new way to
think about the geopolitics of internet control.

## References

Christophers, Brett. *Envisioning Media Power: On Capital and
Geographies of Television* Lanham: Lexington Books, 2009.

Cubitt, Sean. ‘Telecommunication Networks: Economy, Ecology, Rule’,
*Theory, Culture and Society* 31 (2014): 185-199.

Deibert, Ronald et al (eds). *Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power,
Rights, and Rule in Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.

Deibert, Ronald et al. (eds). *Access Contested: Security, Identity, and
Resistance in Asian Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA; MIT Press, 2012.

Deibert, Ronald et al. (eds). *Access Denied: The Practice and Policy of
Global Internet Filtering*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008.

European Commission, ‘Better Online Access to Digital Services’, n.d.,
http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/digital-single-market/access/index\_en.htm.

Goldsmith, Jack and Tim Wu. *Who Controls the Internet? Illusions of a
Borderless World*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

Kompare, Derek. ‘Adverstreaming: Hulu Plus’, *Flow*, 24 Feb 2014,
<http://flowtv.org/2014/02/adverstreaming-hulu-plus/>

Leaver, Tama. ‘Watching “Battlestar Galactica” in Australia and the
Tyranny of Digital Distance’, *Media International Australia* 126
(2008): 145-154.

O’Regan, Tom. ‘From Piracy to Sovereignty: International VCR Trends’,
*Continuum: The Australian Journal of Media & Culture* 4.2 (1991):
112-135.

Parks, Lisa and Nicole Starosielski. *Signal Traffic: Critical Studies
of Media Infrastructures*, University of Illinois Press, 2015.

Paul, Ian. ‘Ultra-popular Hola VPN Extension Sold Your Bandwidth for use
in a Botnet Attack’, *PC World*, 29 May 2015,
http://www.pcworld.com/article/2928340/ultra-popular-hola-vpn-extension-sold-your-bandwidth-for-use-in-a-botnet-attack.html.

Roberts, Hal et al. *2010 Circumvention Tool Usage Report*, Cambridge,
MA: Berkman Center for Internet and Society, 2010

Roberts, Hal, Ethan Zuckerman, and John Palfrey, *2007 Circumvention
Landscape Report: Methods, Uses, and Tools,* Cambridge, MA: The Berkman
Center for Internet and Society, Harvard University, 2007.

Shadbolt, Peter. ‘How Misbehaving at School Made One Man a Millionaire’,
*BBC News*, 18 May 2015, http://www.bbc.com/news/business-32702501.

Turner, Graeme and Jinna Tay. *Television Studies after TV:
Understanding Television in the Post-Broadcast Era*, London: Routledge,
2009.

Wagman, Ira and Peter Urquhart. ‘“This content is not available in your
region”: Geoblocking culture in Canada’, in Darren Wershle, Rosemary
Coombe and Martin Zeilinger (eds) *Dynamic Fair Dealing: Creating
Canadian Culture Online*, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2014,
pp. 124-132.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_1]: In this sense our approach can be distinguished from studies of
    the material infrastructure of the internet. For example, see: Lisa
    Parks and Nicole Starosielski, *Signal Traffic: Critical Studies of
    Media Infrastructures*, University of Illinois Press, 2015.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_2]: Berkman Center researchers have produced a series of pioneering
    studies of internet filtering, censorship and circumvention. See:
    Ronald Deibert et al. (eds), *Access Denied: The Practice and Policy
    of Global Internet Filtering*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008; Hal
    Roberts et al, *2010 Circumvention Tool Usage Report*, Cambridge,
    MA: Berkman Center for Internet and Society, 2010; Deibert et al
    (eds), *Access Controlled: The Shaping of Power, Rights, and Rule in
    Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010; Deibert et al. (eds),
    *Access Contested: Security, Identity, and Resistance in Asian
    Cyberspace*, Cambridge, MA; MIT Press, 2012.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_3]: Ira Wagman and Peter Urquhart, ‘“This content is not available in
    your region”: Geoblocking culture in Canada’, in Darren Wershle,
    Rosemary Coombe and Martin Zeilinger (eds), *Dynamic Fair Dealing:
    Creating Canadian Culture Online*, Toronto: University of Toronto
    Press, 2014, pp. 126.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_4]: Jack Goldsmith and Tim Wu, *Who Controls the Internet? Illusions
    of a Borderless World*, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006, p.
    viii.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_5]: Derek Kompare, ‘Adverstreaming: Hulu Plus’, *Flow*, 24 Feb 2014,
    <http://flowtv.org/2014/02/adverstreaming-hulu-plus/>

[^01LobatoIntroduction_6]: These issues have been explored through key works in video
    geography, to which we are indebted. See: Tom O’Regan, ‘From Piracy
    to Sovereignty: International VCR Trends’, *Continuum: The
    Australian Journal of Media & Culture* 4.2 (1991): 112-135; Brett
    Christophers, *Envisioning Media Power: On Capital and Geographies
    of Television* Lanham: Lexington Books, 2009.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_7]: Graeme Turner and Jinna Tay, *Television Studies after TV:
    Understanding Television in the Post-Broadcast Era*, London:
    Routledge, 2009, p.8.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_8]: Hal Roberts, Ethan Zuckerman, and John Palfrey, *2007
    Circumvention Landscape Report: Methods, Uses, and Tools,*
    Cambridge, MA: The Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard
    University, 2007, p. 9.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_9]: Peter Shadbolt, ‘How Misbehaving at School Made One Man a
    Millionaire’, *BBC News*, 18 May 2015,
    http://www.bbc.com/news/business-32702501.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_10]: Ian Paul, ‘Ultra-popular Hola VPN Extension Sold Your Bandwidth
    for use in a Botnet Attack’, *PC World*, 29 May 2015,
    http://www.pcworld.com/article/2928340/ultra-popular-hola-vpn-extension-sold-your-bandwidth-for-use-in-a-botnet-attack.html.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_11]: Tama Leaver, ‘Watching “Battlestar Galactica” in Australia and
    the Tyranny of Digital Distance’, *Media International Australia*
    126 (2008), pp. 145-154.

[^01LobatoIntroduction_12]: European Commission, ‘Better Online Access to Digital Services’,
    http://ec.europa.eu/priorities/digital-single-market/access/index\_en.htm

[^01LobatoIntroduction_13]: Sean Cubitt, ‘Telecommunication Networks: Economy, Ecology,
    Rule’, *Theory, Culture and Society* 31 (2014), p. 191.




# Test title and the Autonomy of Art: The Culture of Power, the Power of Culture[^Test-chapter_1]

Author name

Lorem Ipsum, advanced neoliberal reforms are taking place at a much
faster pace than in other parts of the world. These reforms have
delivered not only new forms of life and making a living but also new
sensibilities. The erosion of the social contract brought by these
reforms, has had tangible (all negative) effects on the social tissue.
This has materialized, for example, in what is known as the most violent
and dangerous city in the world, Ciudad Juárez, where in 2010 alone,
3000 people were killed. Bearing this in mind, I am defining
neoliberalism as a *sensibility* that shapes subjectivities, permeates
art and culture, differentiates and homogenizes people, molds lives and
desires, mistakes information for knowledge, gives shape to space and
thus to social relations, normalizes violence, creates ways of seeing
the world giving shape to common sense that justifies destruction and
dispossession with notions progress and development, or that tries to
solve economic precarity with self-help and permanent education. I argue
that neoliberalism is more than a system that is ruled by a free market
economy, which implies the privatization of the welfare state and an
array of government services (for example: education, health, energy),
subcontracting to the private sector and changes in labor laws and
worker’s rights as well as a transnational division of labor. The system
of control under neoliberalism combines a militarized police regime with
repressive tolerance, the logic of securitization with granting freedom
of expression and ‘quality of life.’ The political figures, molded and
governed by the neoliberal regime itself are: *homo oeconomicus* (or
entrepreneur, responsible for his own well-being and manager of his own
human capital) and the subject of rights (the State is in charge of
guaranteeing that his human rights are respected). Aside from an
economic-political system, I see neoliberalism as a way of relating to
the world, to nature, to things and beings, which presupposes unlimited
growth and development. It is also a way of living and working: human
beings are being put to work beyond their capacities, erasing the
distinction between the leisure and work time. Neoliberalism is also a
sensibility that establishes the terms of empathy and sympathy and has
outlined a new notion of alterity. Configured as ‘social responsibility’
or social work, to ‘help’ the Other means to focus on the (so-called)
‘secondary malfunctions’ of the current capitalist system by
disseminating personal and managerial practices such as tolerance,
showing respect, nurturing dialogue, transparency and social
collaboration. In this sense, the “Other” is a ‘community to come,’ the
‘subject of rights’ (and to ethical restitution: refugees, displaced,
immigrants, those who live under a ‘state of exception’), the
*underclass*, that is, he or she who will be permanently outside
globalizing process, including access to education, jobs and
consumption. The category of the “Other” encompasses as well, political
and religious fundamentalists, fanatics who are outside globalizing and
modernizing processes by choice. These *Others* are sometimes given
faces in the media or in art by spectacularizing their subjectivity but
obviating the processes that placed them in those very situations that
render their lives precarious and endangered in the first place.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.1375in" height="2.2840277777777778in"}

## Section

### This is a subsection

What has this got to do with the autonomy of art? As we will see, with
postmodernism, art and culture came to be at the center of social,
political and economic processes and are now inextricable from work,
production, consumption and subjectivity: in the neoliberal regime, art
in particular and culture in general are being used actively as
compensation and improvement of tools, normalizing and spreading the
antithesis of autonomous art, that is, ‘useful art.’ Subsumed to
political action, much of contemporary art has taken up a political role
as either ‘sensible politics’ or ‘socially engaged artwork.’ This is
tied to the fact that in our current world order, as Vishmidt and
Stakemeier point out, “Art no longer designates a reproductive and
representational realm, but one of productivity and social power” and
thus the autonomy of art itself has become a problem – in so far as it
has become a realm for the production of added value.[^Test-chapter_2]

In the September 2013 editorial of *e-flux journal*, the editors stated
that art is produced at a double bind: while art can be complicit or
instrumentalized by power, its autonomy is located in an imaginary
space. What do they mean by this? First, that art, in order to be
*seen*, depends on a platform – an institution – and thus needs to be
part of some art world. Second, that the autonomy of art – as a separate
regime or an isolated sphere – is a fantasy. In order to consider the
autonomy of art outside of this double bind, Clement Greenberg tied the
autonomy of art – as art’s for art’s sake – to the avant-garde situating
criticality within the discipline or medium of art itself. Clearly
taking a position against socialist realist painting and those debates
of the 1930s relying on the relationship between art and politics
(embodied for example, by socialist realism or Mexican muralist
painting, which was very popular in New York in the 1930s) in
Greenberg’s definition, avant-garde (Modernist) painting was
characterized by self-critique in the sense that its formal expression
is a meditation on the qualities of the medium of painting. This meant
extricating figuration from the arts, and an essentialist understanding
of the mediums of art: for Greenberg, ‘purity’ was political –
especially if it was seen as an embodiment of a free nation versus the
authoritarian Soviet Union.

Postmodernism could be understood as an effort to break with Greenberg’s
disciplinary totalitarianism. Taking up the Dadaist and surrealist
avant-garde’s goals of unifying art and life, postmodernism thrived with
the advent of interdisciplinary strategies and in the symbiosis of art
with everything else. Post-war art continued the vanguardist critique of
the bourgeois notions of autonomous art and expressive artists,
embracing everyday objects, transforming the artist’s function,
questioning the institution of art or attacking it in the anarchist
manner.[^Test-chapter_3] Following Hal Foster, art from the 1950s and 1960s
represents the failure to destroy the institution of art and the
institutionalization of the avant-garde.[^Test-chapter_4] If Greenberg advocated
aesthetic autonomy with the purpose of resisting illustrational meanings
prone to kitsch and commercial forces, post-modernist’s inter
disciplinary strategies led art, in Foster’s words, “to become embedded
into life under the terms of mass capitalism, while it became
appropriated by the culture industry.”[^Test-chapter_5] Due to its ‘post-medium’
condition, as Rosalind Krauss termed ‘postmodern interdisciplinarity,’
art is enmeshed with reality, and its materials can range from social
interaction, scientific research, montage, etc. With postmodernism, the
politics of the autonomy of art meant breaking away from in Greenberg’s
sense of purity and thus art’s autonomy came to be conceived as
“provisional, always defined diacritically (as something supplemental to
art) and situated politically, always *semi*.”[^Test-chapter_6]

Beyond postmodernism, parallel to the increase of corporate subsidy to
the arts, there has been a recent boom in private collecting and thus a
market boom; the value of art is speculative and reflects the logic of
finance-based economy (and risk), and the economy and critical art share
the core value of ‘innovation.’ In this regard, neoliberalism has meant
for the arts privatization or the collusion between the private and the
public sector in order to subsidize them. In the past decade or so (and
in the US long before that), corporations have played an important role
in investing in culture, as institutions and corporations seek to play
an important role in communicating the private sector point of view on
an array of critical public topics.[^Test-chapter_7] If art was previously supported
by the state, because culture was considered to be an asset to the
nation, today, corporations have appropriated this function, as they
sponsor and jury art shows, grant awards and funds and collect artworks.
Meanwhile, they promote their perspective on critical public topics.[^Test-chapter_8]
In a 1998 article, art historian Chin-tao Wu highlighted how
corporations appropriated the concept of innovation – also known as
innovative disruption or creative destruction – in order to redefine its
meaning in corporate terms. She quotes Philip Morris Inc.’s – the U.S.
cigarette company – executive vice-president, John Murphy, on their
sponsorship of the 1969 exhibition, *When Attitudes Become Form*:

> …We feel it is appropriate that we participate in bringing these works
> to the attention of the public, for there is a key element in this
> ‘new art’ which has its counterpart in the business world. That
> element is *innovation* – without which it would be impossible for
> progress to be made in any segment in society.[^Test-chapter_9]

Furthermore, in the context of neoliberal reforms and sensibility, there
is a global tendency to subdue contemporary art to the politics of
culture administration, which implies “democratizing culture” making it
accessible to the masses, using it as a tool for the well-being of
society, for the reconstruction or healing of a community or society
that has experienced violence. Cultural institutions subsidized by
corporations and individual patrons apparently follow progressive
agendas promoting political – or socially minded art. For instance,
*Creative Time* in New York (funded by a mix of state and corporate
support) supports public and community art, with the goal of enabling
the politicization of social space with cultural intervention. This
organization sponsored Tania Bruguera’s “Immigrant Movement
International,” a project developed in Queens (2011), New York, which
the artist describes as: a flexible community space and long-term
socio-political movement, public workshops, events, actions and
partnerships with immigrant and service organizations; the artist
further qualified her project as “useful art.”[^Test-chapter_10] The problem is that
initiatives such as this one, render opaque the real economic conditions
that led to situations of immigrant precarity to begin with: immigrants
are local signs of complex global forces operating on their conditions
of life and work at home and abroad. Many would argue that subsidy to
projects like Bruguera’s signals the transfer of social work to artistic
work funded by the private sector. In regards to this, politics comes
into the scene through art as social work in the name of ‘public
interest,’ only to become subject to administration, engineering and a
technocratic way of administering social problems, configuring the
private version of the welfare state.[^Test-chapter_11] Furthermore, as the corporate
support to the establishment of antagonistic spaces becomes gradually
institutionalized within society, the question rises, after Gregory
Sholette , “Who owns cultural capital and who has the right to use it?”
.

As for him, corporate involvement in the arts is akin – or perhaps
integral to – to the current erosion of public space.[^Test-chapter_12] Moreover, as
cultural spaces become institutional bastions of democratic
self-expression and sites for social reconciliation and self-help,
dissent is criminalized and forcefully punished worldwide.

It becomes evident that in the neoliberal globalized world, art and
culture are central to neoliberal processes as agents of globalization,
as tools for improvement and development, counterinsurgency and
pacification. An extreme example could be the ‘culturally sensible’
occupation of Iraq as described by Nato Thompson (director of *Creative
Time*). In uncritical terms, Thompson recounts how General David
Petraeus wrote a field manual geared at changing people’s attitudes
towards American occupation in Mosul; as exemplified in:

> A story about counterinsurgency and community organizing, about
> getting to know people as an occupying force, and getting to know
> people as neighbors. It is a story about the military entering the
> terrain of that thing called culture.[^Test-chapter_13]

In this regard, a ‘cultural approach’ to military occupation is akin to
artistic social and community practices, as both involve “getting to
know people to be able to change the landscapes of life and of
power.”[^Test-chapter_14] In the case of civilians in Mosul, this is done obviating
their experiences under attack. This cultural turn in the U.S. military
machinery took place a few years after theorist Frederic Jameson
diagnosed a “cultural turn” in capitalism, arguing that social space had
been completely saturated with the image of culture. This is because in
professional and daily activities, as well as in the various forms of
entertainment we enjoy, society consumes cultural products all the time.
The postmodern “cultural turn” diagnosed by Jameson, was further
elaborated by George Yúdice upon observing (in 2003) that the uses of
culture had undergone an unprecedented expansion not just in the
marketplace but also along social, political, and economic lines.
According to Yúdice, since the state and corporations already utilize
culture as a tool as they search for economic and sociopolitical
betterment, culture has become a resource and a compensatory device to
the ravages neoliberal policies have caused on the social tissue: both
give meaning and symbolic representations, provide mechanisms of solace,
as well as tools for re-invention and amelioration.[^Test-chapter_15] In this
context, the line between public programs and relational aesthetics or
participative art appears to be increasingly blurred. Former Mexican
president Felipe Calderón made a public appearance in February 2012 in
Ciudad Juárez before a sign that stated: “No More Weapons.” The
billboard measured 8 x 21 m, and was built by soldiers of the National
Defense Department with 3 tons of assault weapons confiscated at the
border and molten into bricks. During the ceremony in which the
billboard was unveiled, Calderón turned toward the Mexican-American
border and begged the U.S. (in bad English): “No more weapons! Dear
friends of the United States, Mexico needs your help to stop this
terrible violence we are suffering.” During this trip, Calderón also
participated in the destruction of 6 thousand confiscated weapons, and
planted a tree at a Community Center. Calderon’s propagandistic gestures
immediately recall the language of socially engaged contemporary art,
particularly, Pedro Reyes’ intervention, *Palas por pistolas* in
Culiacán in 2008 (also executed in Juárez in the same week of Calderon’s
visit). Reyes’ project of exchanging shovels for weapons was subsidized
by two predominant Mexican corporations: Trupper (which producers
hardware) and Coppel (which sells appliances and other goods). For this
project, Reyes devised a Television campaign inviting citizens to give
up their weapons in exchange for a coupon exchangeable for appliances.
The artist collected 1527 weapons, which were destroyed at a military
zone in a public act. Giving his action a further twist, Reyes sought to
have the rests of the weapons welded together to produce 1527 shovels
carrying an inscription telling the story of the weapon they represented
(this was not possible due to technical reasons, so Trupper ended up
donating them). The engraved shovels were distributed in art
institutions and public schools and adults and children planted 1527
trees. To Reyes, this ritual had a pedagogical purpose: “to show the
people how an agent of death can become an agent of life.”[^Test-chapter_16] A
similar public purge of weapons in exchange for appliances (and
tablets), is currently happening in Mexico City led by a “Pink Ladies
Brigade.” These relational actions – both by General Petraeus’ and by
the Mexican government, show how the language of contemporary art has
been appropriated by propaganda for its purposes, making politics and
aesthetics indistinguishable, as both operate in the realm of symbolic
and perceptive work. These are also examples of the predominant idea
that violence can be eased – or appeased – through cultural intervention
and in the Mexican case, by giving away highly desirable goods.

Aside from this ‘artistic approach’ to social, political and military
action, sensible production has taken up a political function, as
political work has been developed into a matter of codification using
medial forms with the purpose of creating a terrain for political acts,
creating an “activist imaginary” made of political fields constituted by
images. Political action embedded in cultural forms implies making
things public as a way of signs.[^Test-chapter_17] An example could be Trevor
Paglen’s (sometimes abstract or blurry) photographs of top-secret
governmental, nuclear and military sites. Works such as Paglen’s, seek
to make visible the invisible under the premise that such an act is
political. Yet, what images such as Paglen’s represent is vague in
political terms. What I find problematic is that the gap between
*political* representation and *aesthetic* representation is now wider
than ever. Representation means “making the absent present,” which is
always an incomplete task because totality is impossible to convey, and
it works in two senses. As *Vertreten* (or political representation) it
means taking the place of others in order to speak on their behalf, and
as *Darstellen* (or aesthetic representation) it is the form of
representation that implies describing the other in the first person.
Representation was brought into a crisis in the 1960s because it was
accused of hiding the fact that the speaker was occupying the place of
the represented and thus, workers and minorities were prompted to speak
on their behalf and in the first person. Nowadays, however, the gap
between political (*Vertreten*) and aesthetic (*Darstellen*)
representations is wider than ever because whatever political acts
encoded in medial forms may represent, it renders it unstable – partly
because politics have become unrepresentable due to lack of stable
political subjects – as they are collective enunciations constantly
‘becoming.’ In this context, “expressive” politics is valued over
representation because “it embodies rebellious subjectivities expressing
themselves without delegation and they do so through formal and symbolic
richness.”[^Test-chapter_18] One of the issues that rises is that there is lack of a
common ground to universalize the multiplicity of singular struggles and
social movements scattered across the world like archipelagos. There are
just too many images in the Infosphere, and ‘sensible politics’ exists
for and by its own public, which is made up of social movements and
politically minded cultural producers. In this regard, cultural
infrastructure functions as the platform for ‘sensible politics,’ in
which curators, museum directors and board members (sometimes
representing corporate interests) select and contextualize artwork that
presents certain events and social actions thus determining the
boundaries of public thinking.

Aside from its compensatory role, culture (insofar at it is ‘creativity’
and cognitive production), is not only at the center of political
action, but is also embedded in production and consumption processes,
and neoliberalism – in so far as it has thrived in post-fordist
(flexible) forms and conditions of labor – which had taken up the
characteristics of aesthetic production. Signs and nascent meanings,
desires and projections meet in the market because the post-fordist
economy is based on manufacturing experiences, signs and information.
The core of the knowledge economy is creativity and this is why
qualities of aesthetic production have become hegemonic and have
transformed labor and consumption processes as well as aesthetic
experiences. Not only sensations and feelings are being trivialized and
packaged for sale. Disinterestedness (the core of aesthetic experience
as defined by Kant) has also vanished.[^Test-chapter_19] This arises as the result of
aesthetic experience being enslaved for profit, as well as subsumed to
“political” efficiency – in the sense of State and corporate strategic
investment in culture, as well as it was the transformation of political
action into sensible forms – as opposed to action. These tendencies are
a result of what Stephen Shaviro describes as “the ruthless cognition of
aesthetic sensations and feelings”, as they were transformed into data,
exploited forms of labor, which were marketed as fresh experiences,
exciting lifestyle choices, or as socially-responsible cultural
activities. In the political arena, thirty years of neoliberalism have
crushed any confidence that we might have had on the social contract. If
artists used to identify with the proletariat and social struggles
before, nowadays, aesthetic production – which is lacking a reflexive
program in regards to the conditions of its own production – is geared
just toward the supplementing of the entertainment market with
cultivated and knowledgeable new experiences and sensations.
Furthermore, through subsidizing art and cultural projects,
corporations, states and arts patrons put into practice following
principle of the Prince Claus Fund: “There can be no development without
culture, and there can be no cultural development without freedom of
debate.”[^Test-chapter_20] As this quote becomes evermore evident, the public expects
from culture and art rigorous accountability, critical questioning,
democratic access, dialogue and openness as well as equal representation
in the visual regime (and this is posited as the road to development).
In this context, culture is perceived as “a basic need,” as the founding
principle of Prince Claus Fund states. Thus, states, corporations, the
private sector and society attribute to art a decisive political role on
the one hand, as they invest in culture with the purpose of generating
political and economic surplus value. Bearing in mind that the autonomy
of art is always a political matter, could art be politicized beyond its
autonomy as a site for added value?

The condition of possibility of autonomous, committed art under the new
neoliberal world order, is radically different from what we see as the
autonomy of art under modernism (as *l’art pour l’art*) and post-modern
interdisciplinarity. These imply the institutionalization of the
avant-garde and the subsumption of art to the market, bearing in mind
that the emancipatory promises of modernism (criticality, self-design,
creativity) are now located at the center of our everyday lives both via
consumption and production processes. Theodor Adorno’s take on the
autonomy of art in his (1962) essay entitled “Commitment,” can be
helpful here. In this essay, Adorno responds to Jean-Paul Sartre’s
aesthetic manifesto *What is Literature?* and elaborates a theoretical
debate about engaged literature and autonomous art. According to Adorno,
there are two kinds of works of art. On the one hand, there are works
that “are vulgarly assimilated to the existence against which they
protest.”[^Test-chapter_21] These works “are content with being mere fetishes or a
pass-time, and thus degenerate and become de-politicized cultural
merchandise.”[^Test-chapter_22] This de-politicization, for Adorno is in fact, deeply
political – much politically or socially minded contemporary art would
fit into this category. On the other hand, there is *engaged autonomous
ar*t, which, as art, is necessarily detached from reality. Adorno
defines the autonomy of art not in the sense of its strictly formalist
aspect (although like Walter Benjamin, Adorno also vouches for works of
art that are both formally and politically progressive). For Adorno,
autonomous art negates a direct connection to reality. The distance that
autonomous art has from reality, however, is mediated by reality itself:
this means that a work of art cannot come out of the blue – its origin
is a reaction against reality. Adorno, as does Benjamin, draws a
distinction between ‘commitment’ and ‘tendency.’ Committed art does not
bear the intention of generating betterment measures, legislative acts
or practical institutions (like propaganda) or even transmitting a
concrete ideology, but it operates at the level of fundamental
attitudes. For Adorno, autonomous and engaged works of art operate at
the level of abandoning the social contract with reality and “cease to
speak as if they were reporting the facts: this is the moment in which a
work of art makes people’s hair stand up.”[^Test-chapter_23] According to Adorno, the
shock of the unintelligible (or the ambiguous), is able to communicate
more than what is legible and explicit. In that sense, works of art are
autonomous, instead of heteronomous. Heteronomy implies that an artwork
is subject to a different power, a law that is external and foreign to
art and to its formal logic. When it is autonomous, engaged art is
neither subject to empirical reality nor to a correct political
tendency. Art’s autonomy protects it from popularization, from its
adoption by the market and it implies liberating it from any other
external purpose: from being useful. In this manner, an autonomous work
of art does not convey a message nor does it need to convince the public
(or preach to the converted). And although it opposes society,
autonomous art is still part of it.

If the autonomy of modern art implied considering art as a realm
distanced from reality, art’s post-medium condition means that it has
become a niche within reality.[^Test-chapter_24] What is thus at stake in autonomous
art nowadays, would be to posit it as an experience of reality that is
fundamentally foreign and antagonistic to the prevailing reality. If the
autonomy of art should be located in the realm of reproduction as Marina
Vischmidt argues[^Test-chapter_25] – it would oppose the realm of production of the
social, political and economic surplus value, as it would go against
embodying power and the entrepreneurial model of work. Producing
difference, dragging out the laboring conditions hidden within it,
autonomous art would imply mimesis with distancing itself. Beyond being
used as a tool, autonomous art would refuse becoming an instrument
against its own illusions, as well as refusing to become a political
force, or to be subjected to interests foreign to itself or simply
becoming a pleasing commodity. Overcoming self-censorship, it would
cease to participate in the economy of the globalized artworld,
especially in the name of critical practices, political work or social
justice, abandoning its claim to become a progressive social force.[^Test-chapter_26]
Above all, it would work against the power of culture and the culture of
power.

**Reference List**

Adorno, Theodor. 'Commitment', *New Left Review* I (87088)
(September-December, 1974).
http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment

Emmelhainz, Irmgard. 'Art and the Cultural Turn: Farewell to Committed
Autonomous Art?', *e-flux journal* 42 (February, 2013).
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art/

Espósito, Marcelo. 'Lecciones de historia. El arte, entre la
experimentación institucional y las políticas del movimiento', 2009.
SITAC lecture, http://marceloexposito.net/pdf/exposito\_sitac.pdf

Foster, Hal. 'What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?', *October*, Vol. 70
(Autumn, 1994): 5-32.

Fraser, Andrea. 'Le 1% c’est moi', 2011.
http://whitney.org/file\_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser\_1\_2012whitneybiennial.pdf

Marchart, Oliver. 'Art, Space and the Public Sphere(s)', 2002,
http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en

McLagan, Megan and McKee, Yates (eds) *Sensible Politics:* *The Visual
Culture of Nongovernmental Activism*. Cambridge, Mass., Zone Books,
2012.

Shaviro, Stephen. 'Accelerationist Aesthetics', *e-flux journal* \#46
(Summer, 2013). Dostupno na internet stranici:
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/accelerationist-aesthetics-necessary-inefficiency-in-times-of-real-subsumption/

Sholette, Gregory. 'Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld', *Oxford
Art Journal* 27 (2) (2004) pp. 260-261.
http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf

Stakemeier, Kerstin and Vishmidt, Marina. 'The Value of Autonomy: A
Conversation Between Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt About the
Reproduction of Art', *Texte zur Kunst* 88 (December, 2012): 102–117.

Thompson, Nato. 2013, 'The Insurgents Part I: Community-Based Practice
as Military Methodology,' *e-flux journal* \# 47 (September, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-i-community-based-practice-as-military-methodology/

Vishmidt, Marina. 'Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated: Social
Practice as a Business Model', *e-flux journal* \# 46 (March, 2013),
http://www.e-flux.com/journal/“mimesis-of-the-hardened-and-alienated”-social-practice-as-business-model/

Wu, Chin-tao. 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture: Art Institutions Since
the 1980s', *New Left Review* I 230 (July-August, 1998)

[^Test-chapter_1]: Different versions of this essay were presented at Bureau Publik,
    Copenhaguen, October 31^st^, 2013 and KHIB in Bergen, Norway, on
    November 5, 2013.

[^Test-chapter_2]: Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt, 'The Value of Autonomy: A
    conversation between Kerstin Stakemeier and Marina Vishmidt about
    the reproduction of art,' *Texte zur Kunst* 88 (December 2012):
    102–117.

[^Test-chapter_3]: Hal Foster, 'What’s Neo about the Neo-Avant-Garde?' *October*,
    Vol. 70, The Duchamp Effect (Autumn 1994): 5-32.

[^Test-chapter_4]: Ibid.

[^Test-chapter_5]: Ibid.

[^Test-chapter_6]: Ibid.

[^Test-chapter_7]: Gregory Sholette, 'Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld,'
    *Oxford Art Journal* 27.2, (2004), p. 259.
    http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf

[^Test-chapter_8]: Ibid., pp. 260-261.

[^Test-chapter_9]: Chin-tao Wu, 'Embracing the Enterprise Culture: Art Institutions
    Sicne the 1980s', *New Left Review* I/ 230, (July-August 1998): 31.

[^Test-chapter_10]: See artist’s statement available at:
    http://www.taniabruguera.com/cms/486-0-Immigrant+Movement+International.htm.

[^Test-chapter_11]: Oliver Marchart, 'Art, Space and the Public Sphere(s)' (2002),
    <http://eipcp.net/transversal/0102/marchart/en>

[^Test-chapter_12]: Gregory Sholette, 'Welcome to the Desert of the Real Artworld,'
    *Oxford Art Journal* 27.2 (2004): 260-261, :
    http://www.gregorysholette.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/07\_welcome1.pdf

[^Test-chapter_13]: Nato Thompson, 'The Insurgents Part I: Community-Based Practice
    as Military Methodology,' *e-flux journal* \# 47, (September 2013),
    available
    online:<http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-i-community-based-practice-as-military-methodology/>.
    In the second part of his essay, Thompson includes a disclaimer
    about him glossing over U.S. military violence in Iraq. See:
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/the-insurgents-part-ii-fighting-the-left-by-being-the-left/

[^Test-chapter_14]: Thompson, 2013.

[^Test-chapter_15]: See Irmgard Emmelhainz, 'Art and the Cultural Turn: Farewell to
    Committed Autonomous Art?' *e-flux journal* N. 42 (February 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/art-and-the-cultural-turn-farewell-to-committed-autonomous-art/

[^Test-chapter_16]: Artist’s statement available online:
    http://pedroreyes.net/palasporpistolas.php.

[^Test-chapter_17]: See: Megan McLagan and Yates McKee (eds), 'Introduction,'
    *Sensible Politics: The Visual Culture of Nongovernmental Activism*,
    (Cambridge, Mass., Zone Books, 2012), pp. 9-22.

[^Test-chapter_18]: Marcelo Espósito, 'Lecciones de historia. El arte, entre la
    experimentación institucional y las políticas del movimiento', SITAC
    2009. http://marceloexposito.net/pdf/exposito\_sitac.pdf

[^Test-chapter_19]: Stephen Shaviro, 'Accelerationist Aesthetics,' *e-flux journal*
    \#46 (Summer 2013).

[^Test-chapter_20]: From their website: “… The Prince Claus Fund’s mission is to
    actively seek cultural collaborations founded on equality and trust,
    with partners of excellence, in spaces where resources and
    opportunities for cultural expression, creative production and
    research are limited and cultural heritage is threatened. The Prince
    Claus Fund is based in Amsterdam and is supported by the Dutch
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Dutch Postcode Lottery.” For
    more information, visit their website:
    http://www.princeclausfund.org/en/the-fund.

[^Test-chapter_21]: Theodor Adorno, 'Comittment,' *New Left Review* I/87088
    (September-December 1974),
    http://newleftreview.org/I/87-88/theodor-adorno-commitment

[^Test-chapter_22]: Ibid.

[^Test-chapter_23]: Ibid.

[^Test-chapter_24]: Marina Vishmidt, 'Mimesis of the Hardened and Alienated: Social
    Practice as a Business Model,' *e-flux journal* 43 (March, 2013),
    http://www.e-flux.com/journal/“mimesis-of-the-hardened-and-alienated”-social-practice-as-business-model/

[^Test-chapter_25]: Ibid.

[^Test-chapter_26]: Andrea Fraser, 'Le 1% c’est moi' (2011), Le gorille penseur est
    un guerrier : le guerrier est un être pour la mort, puisque son
    métier consiste à mourir. Ici, il pense un peu à la fin de son
    espèce, ou à la fin de l'ère des guerriers -notre époque n'est plus
    celle des guerriers, elle est celle des insectes, des animaux
    insignifiants, plus capables de
    s'adapterhttp://whitney.org/file\_columns/0002/9848/andreafraser\_1\_2012whitneybiennial.pdf



